---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/2/
type: stop
section_title: The Spear
title: Greek: dory 
page_rank: 2
stop_id: 2
audio_file: NASA_main_Computers_are_in_Control.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 02-second-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Spear head one 
 - path: 02-second-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Spear head two
---


## The main weapon of the hoplite was a heavy thrusting spear called a <i>dory</i> in Greek. 

It was between 2 and 3 metres long and had an iron head with a lead-shaped blade between 20 and 30 centimetres long. The base of the spear had a smaller four sided spike called a <i>sauroter</i> in Greek; literally a ‘lizard-killer’. The <i>sauroter</i> was twice as heavy as the spearhead and helped to balance the spear and extend its reach. 

They were also useful for supporting the spear in the ground while at rest, effectively attacking someone on the ground, and as a secondary weapon in case the head broke off. 

These types of spears were for thrusting, not for throwing. 

These bronze spear heads come from the Greek colonies around Metaponto in southern Italy and were part of smaller throwing spears of javelins. They have the same basic design as hoplite spears, however, with tubular sockets for the wooden shaft, and a leaf-shaped blade with a central rib. 

The spear, rather than the sword, was the primary weapon of the Greek hoplite soldier. 

Its length gave it good reach, and meant that it could be used one handed in a phalanx while the other held the large hoplite shield. Battles with this kind of spear could be very dangerous due to the size and shape of the spearhead. Once in range of the enemy, the phalanx stabbed at the enemy and pushed forward, literally shoving their opponents until one side gave way.

> Images: Volute Krater, Apulia, Italy, Terracotta, c. 330 BC. Purchased from Think Ancient, 1987. UQ 87.011. 
> Spear-Head, Metaponto, Italy, bronze, 800 - 500 BC. Purchased from the Toussaint Collection with funds from the Castlehow Bequest, 1995. UQ 95.095 b (i).
