---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/3/
type: stop
section_title: The Helmet
title: Italo-Corinthian Style 
page_rank: 3
stop_id: 3
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp3
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 03-third-stop-01.jpg
---
## One of the main parts of the hoplite’s heavy armour was the helmet. 

Once in a phalanx formation, eight or more ranks deep, these shiny helmets with brightly coloured crests would have been an intimidating sight, and provided excellent protection for the head. 

## The Etrusco-Corinthian Helmet
This helmet is one example of the different styles of hoplite helmet that appeared over time. It is known as an Etrusco-Corinthian style helmet, developed in Southern Italy from the original Corinthian style helmet which was made from a single piece of bronze. 

This helmet is probably incomplete, or maybe was only decorative. The dome-shape is too small and the small, almond-shaped eye holes aren’t joined to the nose. It would have been very uncomfortable to wear like this, and impossible to speak, hear or see easily! A two-pronged plume holder is riveted to the top of the helmet and would have held a horse hair plume. The cheeks of helmet are decorated with a pair of engraved boars, perhaps intended to give the wearer the strength and resilience of the wild boar. 

## Defence or Practicality? 

When not in combat, hoplites would push their helmets back so that they would sit on top of their heads. Although this was much less practical in terms of defence, it was more comfortable and allowed hoplites to see and hear more effectively, and adapt to different combat situations. 

Some types of hoplite helmet traded the extra protection of the Corinthian type, for the ability to see, hear and communicate more effectively, but leaving the face fully or partially open. 


> Images: Loutrophoros, Campania, Italy, Terracotta, 350 - 325 BC. Purchased from Christie, Manson & Woods Ltd, London, with funds from the Castlehow Bequest, 1976. UQ 76.003
