---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/4/
type: stop
section_title: The Hoplite Phalanx 
title: Neck-Amphora with Farewell Scene 
page_rank: 4
stop_id: 4
audio_file: stop_4.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 04-fourth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Front of Neck Amphora
 - path: 04-fourth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Detail of Neck Amphora
---

## The Cost of War
Inevitably, conflict between neighbouring city states lead to the death of warriors who were then commemorated in their home communities. Often these commemorations, on vases or sculptures, give us vital evidence about the types of equipment soldiers used, and how ancient warfare was conducted. They also tells us about how soldiers were remembered by their loved ones. 

This neck-amphora or <i>loutrophoros</i> (water carrier) was made by Greek artisans in southern Italy in the late 4th century BC. It shows a farewell scene between a mounted warrior and a standing woman who offers him a <i>skyphos</i> (cup). The warrior is depicted wearing typical Oscan battledress: a helmet with three plumes, and a short tunic over which he wears a moulded breastplate. He also wears a short sword at his waist, and over his shoulder, he carries a long spear with a shield slung over it. 

## Mutual Defence
The breastplate and shield joined the helmet as the main defensive armour of the hoplite, with the breastplate protecting the vital organs of the torso, while the large shield covered the hoplite from ankle to neck. The defensive integrity of the hoplite phalanx relied on soldiers armed with these shields overlapping them to produce an impenetrable wall. If one soldier broke ranks, all the others were at risk. 

Images like this show what happened when a battle didn’t go well for an individual soldier, or his phalanx. Military endeavours and the associated wounds, psychological harm, and loss of life, were a reality of daily life in the ancient world. 

> Images: Neck-Amphora with Farewell Scene, Campania, Italy, Terracotta, 350-325 BC. Purchased from Christie, Manson & Woods Ltd, London, with funds from the Castlehow Bequest, 1976. UQ  76.003
