---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/5/
type: stop
section_title: Hoplite Armour
title: Flask in the Form of a Greaved Leg 
page_rank: 5
stop_id: 5
audio_file: stop_5.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 05-fifth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Flask in the Form of a Greaved Leg 
---

## Greek Greaves
Hoplites did not need armour on their upper legs as they were covered by their large shield, but the lower leg needed protection as it was more vulnerable where the shields of the phalanx overlapped. 

This moulded terracotta flask is shaped like a leg wearing a bronze greave, a type of armour used to protect this exposed area of the lower leg, from the knee to the ankle. The example you can see comes from the island of Rhodes and dates to between 600 and 575 BC. The greave itself is very simple and only has a small amount of decoration at the knee. It provides a useful example of how this piece of Greek armour would have looked and how it functioned. 

The greaves were shaped to the leg of an individual warrior and were probably lined with leather for additional protection and comfort. A hoplite had to have the money to purchase and maintain this custom armour, so they tend to come from the higher ranks of Greek society. 

## The Aryballos

This type of <i>aryballos</i> or flask was used as a container for oil used in bathing. Because of its military imagery, a flask in the shape of a greave was a suitable item for a young man or more experienced warrior to keep their olive oil in for training and day to day exercise. A piece of string could be tied around the neck and it could be easily carried over the shoulder for use in the gymnasium after training. 

> Image: Flask in the form of a Greaved Leg, Rhodes (?), Greece, Terracotta, 600 - 575 BC. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd, London, 1990. UQ 90.003
