---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/6/
type: stop
section_title: Training Hoplites
title: Black Figure Wrestling Cups 
page_rank: 6
stop_id: 6
audio_file: stop_6.mp3
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 06-sixth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Band cup with Wrestlers
 - path: 06-sixth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Lip cup with Wrestlers 
---

## Military Service
The physical fitness of Greek citizens was an important part of their training for military service. This training, called the <i>ephebeia</i> lasted up to two years from the time a man came of age at 18. It often took place at a <i>gymnasium</i> where male citizens would come together to participate in physical exercise including running, wrestling, and other contests of skill, speed and endurance. 

## Greek Athletics
As well as being a location for military training, <i>gymnasia</i> where also training areas for those involved in organised athletic contests, like the Olympic Games. By the 6th century BC there were four large “international” competitions of this type held in Greece, which attracted athletes from around the Greek world. The victors at all these games brought honour to themselves, their families, and their hometowns.

Here you can see two <i>kylikes</i> or drinking cups, decorated with images of men involved in wrestling matches. On one, we also see the trainers and onlookers to the wrestling match, which would have taken place at a <i>palaestra</i> or wrestling ground. Wrestling was a popular competition, and was regarded as an important expression of individual strength. 

These feats of individual strength were at the core of Greek athletics, and while athletic training was also important to prepare citizens for military service, there is one important distinction to make. Athletic contests were about the individual and team sports were almost unknown in ancient Greece. However, the military service of a hoplite in a phalanx was all about working together as a group to ensure the protection of each other, and the state. 

> Images: Band Cup with Wrestlers, Greek, Terracotta, c. 530 BC. Purchased from Folio Fine Art Ltd, London, 1968. UQ 68.001. Lip Cup with Wrestlers, Greek, Terracotta, c. 550 BC. Purchased from Hesperia Art. 1963. UQ 63.002
