---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/7/
type: stop
section_title: Hygiene on Campaign 
title: Strigil
page_rank: 7
stop_id: 7
audio_file: stop_7.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 07-seventh-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Strigil 
---

## Spartan Soldiers
In Book 7 of his Histories, Herodotus describes the bathing practices of the Spartan soldiers at The Battle of Thermopylae. Xerxes sent an envoy to spy on the Greek camp and see what they were doing. Herodotus tells us that: 

### Riding up to the camp, the horseman watched and spied out the place. He saw some of the men exercising naked and others combing their hair. Herodotus 7.208-9 

These types of activities were an important part of Greek military training at the gymnasium and bathing was just as common and necessary for soldiers on campaign as it was at home. However, the Greeks and Romans didn’t bathe with soap - they used olive oil instead!

After exercise and bathing men would rub olive oil on themselves and scrape the mixture of oil, sweat, dirt and dead skin off with a special tool called a strigil. You can see one of these curious instruments here – a curved piece of bronze with a handle, shaped to scrape down the arms, legs and torso. 

## Physical Condition
Even when away on campaign for long periods, soldiers needed to conduct everyday activities like exercise and bathing. This supposedly surprised Xerxes, when his scout reported to him, but maintaining a soldier’s physical condition through exercise, good rations, and a sanitary camp, where important activities to help ensure success on campaign. 

> Image: Strigil, Metaponto, Italy, Bronze, 500-400 BC. Purchased from the Toussaint Collection with funds from the Castlehow Bequest, 1995. UQ 95.091 a
