---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/8/
type: stop
section_title: The Art of War
title: Red-figure Column Krater 
page_rank: 8
stop_id: 8
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp8
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 08-eighth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Red-figure Column Krater 
 - path: 08-eigth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Theseus
---

## The Hoplite in Greek Myth

From as early as the Homeric epics, mythological Greek warriors were depicted in literature and in art. 

Often, these heroes are depicted without key parts of the equipment a regular soldier would use, particularly armour. These depictions of the “heroic nude” mark the person out as a hero of semi divine being, with special powers and superior military prowess. 

This Red-Figure Column Krater or wine mixing bowl from about 450 BC shows one such heroic nude. 

The scene is an Amazonomachy, a battle between Greeks and Amazons. On one side are the Amazons, female warriors from the east who fought with mythical Greek heroes. 

On the other side is a naked warrior representing the hero Theseus, early king of Athens and political reformer who brought together the various parts of Attica into a city-state. Theseus wears a Corinthian helmet with a high plume, and wields a shield and spear, but he wears no armour at all! Because of his superior skills, Theseus is also not part of a Phalanx, but fights alone. 

The artist turns the regular conventions of hoplite warfare upside down to show the special status of the hero Theseus. 

This scene is particularly significant because about the time it was made, the Persians had invaded Greece, and been defeated for a second time. Stories like the mythical Greek battles with the Amazons show how important warfare was in Greek society, and how important it was to triumph over your enemies. 

> Images: Column Krater with Theseus and Amazons, Attica, Greece, terracotta, c. 450 BC. Sold by Sotheby's, London, Lot 314, 21st May 1984. Purchased from Graham Geddes Antiques and Antiquites with funds from the University of Queensland Alumni Association. UQ 87.208. 
