---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/9/
type: stop
section_title: Changing Armies 
title: Tetradrachm of Lysimachus 
page_rank: 9
stop_id: 9
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp9
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 09-ninth-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Obverse of coin with Alexander 
 - path: 09-ninth-stop-02.jpg
   alt_text: Reverse of Coin with Athena 
---

## Changing Armies 

During the Hellenistic period, Greek warfare changed considerably under the domination of the Macedonian dynasty led by Philip, his son Alexander the Great, and after Alexander’s death in 332 BC, his generals. 

Hellenistic armies under Alexander combined many different types of unit, from heavy and light infantry and cavalry, to different types of missile troops. These combinations of units were very effective and could be deployed to many different situations. Hellenistic armies also made extensive use of mercenary troops, either as specialist, or as rank-and-file hoplites. 

## Lysimachus, Heir of Alexander the Great 

This silver coin is a tetradrachm or four drachma piece minted by King Lysimachus, one of Alexander the Great’s generals. It was minted in Ionia, on the coast of modern Turkey, between 306 and 281 BC. 

The front side, called the obverse, shows Alexander the Great with the horn of Zeus Ammon sprouting from his head. 

Coins like this are useful vehicles for conveying political messages, but also served their basic economic function of facilitating payments. Hellenistic silver issues like this one may well have been used to pay for mercenaries and supplies as part of the frequent large-scale military campaigns of the era. 

Lysimachus was allotted Thrace as his territory after Alexander’s death, and undertook significant military campaigns there to put down local resistance. After 302 BC he took part in a series of military actions against other Hellenistic kings, and considerably expanded his territory. Warfare and military success were therefore essential to the reputation of Hellenistic kings, but even they were not match for the Romans.  

> Images: Tetradrachm of Lysimachus with Alexander III,  Thrace, Greece, silver, 306 BC - 281 BC. Purchased from Munzen und Medaillen AG, Basel, 1967.UQ C.019. 
